docs/rendering.md, before:

# rendering.lisp

Purpose
- Load visual assets and render the world, entities, HUD, and menus.

Why we do it this way
- Rendering reads state, it does not create it. This keeps logic deterministic
  and makes it easy to add a headless/server mode later.
- The draw pipeline is tile-based so we can add chunk culling and caching later.

Pipeline overview
1) Load textures in `load-assets`.
2) Draw world layers, zone objects, and debug overlays in `draw-world`.
3) Draw entities via `draw-entity` (NPCs and player).
4) When `*debug-npc-logs*` is on, NPCs render an AI text overlay (state/hits).
5) Draw HUD (stamina + zone label), minimap (centered on player with adjacent zone spawn previews), loading overlay, editor overlays, and menu overlays.

Key functions
- `load-assets`, `unload-assets`.
- `draw-world`, `draw-zone-objects`.
- `draw-player`, `draw-npc`, `draw-health-bar`, `draw-hit-effect`.
- `draw-hud`, `draw-minimap`, `draw-menu`, `draw-game`.
- `draw-loading-overlay` for zone swap feedback.

Walkthrough: world rendering
1) Compute visible tile bounds from camera and player position.
2) Draw floor tiles, zone layers, and wall map tiles.
3) Draw placed zone objects inside the view bounds.
4) If debug is enabled, overlay collision/bounds grid.
5) Draw player and NPCs in world space.
6) Draw HUD, minimap, loading overlay, editor overlays, and pause menu in screen space.

Example: draw flow
```lisp
(raylib:with-mode-2d camera
  (draw-world world render assets camera player npcs ui)
  (loop :for entity :across entities
        :do (draw-entity entity assets render)))
```

Design note
- The debug overlay draws both collision tiles and map bounds, which helps
  validate that collision and visuals are aligned.
- NPC AI debug text is only drawn when explicitly enabled, keeping the
  default render path clean and fast.
- The camera target follows the editor camera when Editor Mode is active.
- The HUD reads the world zone label so you always know which zone is active.
- The minimap recenters on the player, so you can always click ahead to set a target.
- The minimap draws small preview markers for spawns in adjacent zones so you can
  see potential enemies before crossing; zones without explicit spawns show the
  zone-centered default grid (matching `make-npcs`) instead. Previews render while
  you are pushing against a connected edge or standing within
  `*minimap-preview-edge-tiles*` tiles of one to avoid confusing them with
  in-zone NPCs.
- Collision tiles render as faint minimap markers so navigational blockers are visible.

Commit message:

Show world outer edge boundary on minimap

docs/rendering.md, after:

# rendering.lisp

Purpose
- Load visual assets and render the world, entities, HUD, and menus.

Why we do it this way
- Rendering reads state, it does not create it. This keeps logic deterministic
  and makes it easy to add a headless/server mode later.
- The draw pipeline is tile-based so we can add chunk culling and caching later.

Pipeline overview
1) Load textures in `load-assets`.
2) Draw world layers, zone objects, and debug overlays in `draw-world`.
3) Draw entities via `draw-entity` (NPCs and player).
4) When `*debug-npc-logs*` is on, NPCs render an AI text overlay (state/hits).
5) Draw HUD (stamina + zone label), minimap (centered on player with adjacent zone spawn previews), loading overlay, editor overlays, and menu overlays.

Key functions
- `load-assets`, `unload-assets`.
- `draw-world`, `draw-zone-objects`.
- `draw-player`, `draw-npc`, `draw-health-bar`, `draw-hit-effect`.
- `draw-hud`, `draw-minimap`, `draw-menu`, `draw-game`.
- `draw-loading-overlay` for zone swap feedback.

Walkthrough: world rendering
1) Compute visible tile bounds from camera and player position.
2) Draw floor tiles, zone layers, and wall map tiles.
3) Draw placed zone objects inside the view bounds.
4) If debug is enabled, overlay collision/bounds grid.
5) Draw player and NPCs in world space.
6) Draw HUD, minimap, loading overlay, editor overlays, and pause menu in screen space.

Example: draw flow
```lisp
(raylib:with-mode-2d camera
  (draw-world world render assets camera player npcs ui)
  (loop :for entity :across entities
        :do (draw-entity entity assets render)))
```

Design note
- The debug overlay draws both collision tiles and map bounds, which helps
  validate that collision and visuals are aligned.
- NPC AI debug text is only drawn when explicitly enabled, keeping the
  default render path clean and fast.
- The camera target follows the editor camera when Editor Mode is active.
- The HUD reads the world zone label so you always know which zone is active.
- The minimap recenters on the player, so you can always click ahead to set a target.
- The minimap draws small preview markers for spawns in adjacent zones so you can
  see potential enemies before crossing; zones without explicit spawns show the
  zone-centered default grid (matching `make-npcs`) instead. Previews render while
  you are pushing against a connected edge or standing within
  `*minimap-preview-edge-tiles*` tiles of one to avoid confusing them with
  in-zone NPCs.
- Collision tiles render as faint minimap markers so navigational blockers are visible,
  including zone boundary tiles to show world edges (internal edges with world-graph
  exits are suppressed).
